Housekeeping mode (#699)
smart-data-lake/smart-data-lake: blog/2023-06-08-SDL-Housekeeping/2023-06-08-housekeeping.md

Once validated, we use Delta Lake tables in Databricks to process data through the layers of the Lakehouse.

## Partitioning
The Azure Function puts uploaded JSON files in a subfolder for each reporting unit. 
As such, JSON files are already neatly partitioned by `reporting_unit`:
```
uploadFolder/
  reporting_unit=rp01
    file1.json
    file2.json
    file3.json
  reporting_unit=rp02
    file1.json
  reporting_unit=rp03
    fileX.json
```

To read these JSON files, we can therefore use the following DataObject definition:
```
import_json {
    type = JsonFileDataObject
    path = uploadFolder/
    partitions = [reporting_unit]    
}
```

These files are then processed with a `FileTransferAction` into an output DataObject `stage_json`: 
```
stage_json {
    type = FileTransferAction
    inputId = import_json
    outputId = stage_json
    executionMode = { type = FileIncrementalMoveMode }
    metadata.feed = stage_json
}
```

Each time we start to process uploaded data, we use the `run_id` to keep track of all batch jobs and version of files delivered.
If you use a state path (see [commandLine](../../docs/reference/commandLine)), 

> your runs automatically use `run_id`s and you can use it by extending your DataObject:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your runs automatically generate a `run_id` to identify the run, and you can use it by extending your DataObject:
```

```
stage_json {
    type = JsonFileDataObject
    path = processedFolder
    partitions = [run_id,reporting_unit]
    schema = """reporting_unit string, run_id string, ...."""
}
```
Note how we just use run_id as part of the schema without any further declaration.

> Since we use the state path, SDLB uses a `run_id` internally, and we can use it too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we use the state path, SDLB uses a `run_id` internally, and if it's referenced as partition column in a DataObject, processed data get automatically assigned the id of the current run.
```

## Drawback
Let's take a look at the resulting partition layout of `stage_json`:
```
processedFolder/
  run_id=1/
    reporting_unit=rp01/
      file1.json
      file2.json
      file3.json
    reporting_unit=rp02/
      file1.json
    reporting_unit=rp03/
      fileX.json
```
This partition layout has many advantages in our case as we know exactly 
during which run a particular file was processed and which reporting unit uploaded it.
In further stages we can clearly work with files that were processed in the current run and not touch any old `run_id`s. 

But the drawbacks of this partition scheme becomes apparent after running for a longer time:

>   - Some reporting units don't upload data for days. You end up with only a few reporting_unit partitions per run_id.

Reviewer: This is actionally not yet a drawback, is it?
The list rather explains details of how partitions look like. But the drawback is the number of partitions (incl. subpartitions) created in an year. Also if you dont have to read these files, there might be a list partitions operation somewhere, which can already take a lot of time. And as you mention later, if you have to read all the partitions with small files it gets really slow...

Author: Good point. I rewrote that in https://github.com/smart-data-lake/smart-data-lake/pull/699/commits/48a5799cd74298feeb6e67e8330c4433ec898018

  - File sizes are rather small (< 1 MiB), partition sizes end up very small too.

>   - If you use hourly runs and run 24/7, you end up with 168 per week, plus sub-partitions for reporting units.

Reviewer 2: 168 files?

Author: Partitions :-) Thanks, fixed it.

In this case we use `runId` (the current runId) and `elements` (all partition values as map(string,string)).
It needs to return a map(string,string) to define new partition values. 
In our case, it needs to define `run_id` and `reporting_unit` because these are the partitions defined in `stage_json`.

Let's take the expression apart:  
`if(elements.run_id < (runId - 500), ...`  
Only archive the partition if it's runId is older than 500 run_ids ago. 

`map('run_id', (cast(elements.run_id as integer) div 500) * 500, 'reporting_unit', elements.reporting_unit)`  
Creates the map with the new values for the partitions. 
The run_id is floored to the next 500 value, so as example, the new value of run_id 1984 will be 1500 (because integer 1984/500=3, 3*500=1500).  
Remember that we need to return all partition values in the map, also the ones we don't want to alter.
For `reporting_unit` we simply return the existing value `elements.reporting_unit`.

`..., elements)`  
This is the else condition and simply returns the existing partition values if there is nothing to archive.

:::info
The housekeeping mode is applied after writing a DataObject.

> Keep in mind, that it is always executed.

Reviewer: Maybe more precise, wdyt?
```suggestion
Keep in mind, that it is executed with every run.
```

:::

#### Compaction

> We don't want compact files in our case. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don't want to compact files in our case. 
```
